# 06 Chain Friction 
    
  
## Aim   
 Determining the coefficient of static friction.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1K20 (Friction)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 1k2006_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Table. 
 *  Chain, ($l = 1.2\mathrm{~m}$).  
 *  Bar.
                      
## Presentation   
The chain is laid out straight on a table. One end is slowly pulled over the edge until the chain just does not slip. The coefficient of friction $\left(\mu_{s}\right)$ between the table top and chain is then $\mu_{s}=\frac{l_{0}}{l-l_{0}}$, where $l$ is the total length of the chain and $l_{0}$ the length of the overhanging portion.   
  
## Explanation   
No slipping means that forces are in equilibrium: $F_{1}=F_{2}$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1k2006_figure_1.png>`).

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 1k2006_figure_1.png  

. 
```
The mass of the part of the chain hanging over the edge equals: $m_{1}=\frac{l_{0}}{l} m$. This makes: $l_{0} F_{1}=\frac{l_{0}}{l} m g$.

The mass of the part of the chain still on the table equals: $m_{2}=\frac{l-l_{0}}{l} m$. 

The normal force of that part of the chain equals: $F_{N}=\frac{l-l_{0}}{l} m g \rightarrow F_{2}=\mu_{\mathrm{s}} F_{N}=\mu_{s} \frac{l-l_{0}}{l} m g$. 

$F_{1}=F_{2}$ now yields: $\frac{l_{0}}{l} m g=\mu_{s} \frac{l-l_{0}}{l} m g$, and so: $\mu_{s}=\frac{l_{0}}{l-l_{0}}$.  
  
## Remarks   
- It is advisable to make the corner of the table a low friction surface, e.g. rounding that corner. You can of course also make a special surface for your chain (acrylic plate, bended at one end). We used a stand bar as a low friction surface for the corner of the table.
- Instead of a chain, the demonstration can also be done with a piece of soft cloth or rope.
   
  
## Sources   
- Meiners, Harry F., Physics demonstration experiments, part 1, pag. 152
  