# 02 Newton's Rings (2)
  
## Aim   
 To show Newton's rings, and that its color sequence is not a rainbow.    
  
## Subjects   
* 6D30 (Thin Films)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d3002_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Newton's rings apparatus (convex lens pressed against flat glass plate; pressure can be adjusted by screws in the ring-mount). 
 *  Hg-lamp, with power-unit. 
 *  Objective lens. 
 *  Two lenses $f=150\mathrm{~mm}/diam.=70\mathrm{~mm}$. 
 *  Flat surface mirror. 
 *  Black screen.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  The Hg-lamp needs some time to come to its full light intensity. It also becomes very hot! Do not touch it.
   
  
## Presentation   
Set up the equipment as shown in Diagram. Images are projected on the wall (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_1.png>`A)    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d3002_figure_1.png  

. 
```

After the lamp is heated up, situation of Diagram A is presented to the students, to indicate that there will be a reflected and a transmitted beam of light. Then the transmitted beam is blocked (black screen) and using the mirror and a $+150 \mathrm{~mm}$-lens the reflection image is projected (Diagram B). Clearly Newton's rings are observed. Observe the central dark spot (see also: Remarks) observe the colored rings, the color-sequence and observe the diminishing distance between the rings when moving away from the centre. Changing the pressure on the Newton's rings apparatus will change/move the reflected image. Then the black screen is removed and using the second $+150 \mathrm{~mm}$-lens the transmitted image is projected next to the reflected image (see Diagram C and {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_1.png>`). It is clearly visible that both images are complementary.

At first glance, the observed colors look rainbowlike, but careful observation shows that it differs from a rainbow (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_2.png>`; reality is much better than this photograph).

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d3002_figure_2.png  

. 
```

Observing the reflected image shows, when moving away from the central dark spot, at first a rainbow, but already in the next ring the color purple appears; in the next rings white and orange are dominating; around ring 10 there is a repeating sequence of blue and orange and around ring 16 repeating bands of dark violet and yellowish rings are visible giving form a distance the impression of a continuity of black and white fringes.   
  
## Explanation   
See {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_1.png>` B. Looking at the two red rays drawn in this figure, we see that it is the height $d$ that introduces the phasedifference. $d=R-\left(R^{2}-x^{2}\right)^{1 / 2}$.

The two rays, one reflecting from the hemisphere and the other reflecting from the plane, will have a phasedifference of $\Delta \phi=k(2 d)-\pi$ ( $\pi$ at reflection off the plane).

Maximum, constructive interference will occur at $\Delta \varphi=\frac{4 \pi d}{\lambda}-\pi=m 2 \pi$, so when $d=1 / 2 \lambda(m+1 / 2)$.

This result translated to the distance $x$ (because $x$ lies in the plane we are watching/projecting) yields $1 / 2 \lambda(m+1 / 2)=R-\left(R^{2}-x^{2}\right)^{1 / 2}$, giving $x=\{\lambda R(m+1 / 2)$ $\left.1 / 4 \lambda^{2}(m+1 / 2)^{2}\right\}^{1 / 2}$. And $R$ being much larger than $\lambda$ will give $x=\{\lambda R(m+1 / 2)\}^{1 / 2}$. First conclusion is that $x$ is proportional to the squareroot of wavelength. So a higher wavelength yields a higher $x$. blue is on the inside, red on the outside. Second, the proportionality in $(m+1 / 2)^{1 / 2}$ shows that the sequence of the bright fringes follows a square root: moving away from the centre the fringes come closer and closer together.

```{figure} figures/figure_3.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d3002_figure_3.png  

. 
```

Finally, we calculated for a number of $m$-values $x$. {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_3.png>` shows the calculated results ( $10^{-5} ; \mathrm{R}=1 \mathrm{~m}$ ) for the red, green and blue line of $\mathrm{H}_{0}$-light. In this way it is clear that the colours observed are the result of different combinations. Only near the centre a rainbow pattern appears.

It is not difficult now to show that for destructive interference we get $x=(\lambda R \mathrm{~m})^{1 / 2}$. This yields that the centre of the reflected Newton's rings must be a dark spot. {numref}`Figure {number} <6d3002_figure_3.png>` shows the minima as dashed lines for red, green and blue.
  
## Remarks
 *  Using filters, it is possible to show a monochromatic interference pattern. Especially in the yellow line of Hg the pattern is bright. 
 *  In the projected reflection image the central area should be dark. But usually there is a coloured spot instead. This is probably due to trapped dirt in the contact area between the two surfaces.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 878-879 
 *  Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 398-399 
 *  Young, H.D. and Freeman, R.A., University Physics, pag. 1152-1153
 