
```{figure} /figures/ready.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 1E10.02 
  # Galilean Cart 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show and discuss an example of Galilean transformations    
  
## Subjects   
 1E10 (Moving Reference Frames)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: 1e1002/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Two carts, easy rolling and able to carry a human being; construction as shown in [Diagram](#diagram). 
 *  Large funnel (outlet reduced to $4 \mathrm{~mm}$), suspended by three cords. 
 *  Clamping material to support the funnel-pendulum. 
 *  $1 \mathrm{~kg}$ of salt. 
 *  Broom.
     
  
## Presentation   
 
 *  One person sits on the cart and fills the funnel with salt, keeping the outlet closed with a finger and gives the funnel-pendulum a deflection into the $x^{\prime}$-direction. The demonstrator moves the cart with constant speed along the front of the lecture hall ($y$-direction). As soon as the speed is constant, the person on the cart makes the pendulum go. A salt-track is written on the floor of the lecturehall (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_2.png>`). This track shows the recording of the movement of the swinging funnel in the $x$-$y$ plane.    
 
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: 1e1002/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: 1e1002/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 

 *  The same demonstration is performed but now with the funnel-pendulum swinging into the $y^{\prime}$-direction. A second salt-track appears on the floor (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_1.png>`). 
 
Again the salttrack shows the recording of the movement of the swinging funnel in the $x$-$y$ plane. 

The results are discussed.
    
  
## Explanation   
 
- The pendulum moves in the $x^{\prime}$-$y^{\prime}$-$z^{\prime}$-frame according to: $x^{\prime}=A \sin (\omega t+\phi)$; $y^{\prime}=0 ; z^{\prime}=0$. The writing on the ground in salt is in the $x-y-z$-frame. The $x^{\prime}-y^{\prime}-z^{\prime}-$ frame moves with a speed $\mathrm{V}$ into the $\mathrm{y}$-direction., so a point measured in the $x^{\prime}-$ $y^{\prime}-z^{\prime}$-frame will have an $y$-coordinate: $y=V t$. (see Figure2).
- When the pendulum swings into the $y^{\prime}$-direction, the movements in the $x$-y-zframe will be: $y=V t+A \sin (\omega t+\phi) ; x=0$ and $z=0$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_2.png>`).   
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  As {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_1.png>` makes clear, the difference between much - and little salt is more pronounced when $y=V t$ is steeper; that is at higher speeds of the cart.   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 173-174 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 24-25
     