# 03 Boomerang Ball (2)  
  
## Aim   
The concept of impulse explains this very peculiar behavior of a bouncing ball.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1K10 (Dynamic Torque) 
* 1N10 (Impulse and Thrust)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k1003/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Superball. 
 *  Table.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  A superball can jump into many unexpected directions, so mind vulnerable objects in the neighborhood.
    
  
## Presentation   
 The table is positioned as shown in Diagram. The ball is thrown as shown. The ball bounces to a fro.    
  
## Explanation   
As a basis to explanation see the demonstration [Boomerang ball](../1K1002%20Boomerang%20Ball/1K1002.md). Using a large basketball thrown against the floor and then bouncing against a vertical wall, shows that after hitting the vertical wall the basketball still rotates clockwise. {numref}`Figure {number} <1k1003/figure_1.png>`A shows this.    

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k1003/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

(The effect of the friction force $F_{R}$ in $\mathrm{Q}$ is not that large as that of $F_{R}$ in $\mathrm{P}$, since the ball approaches the vertical wall with $\vec{p}_{h}$ and this momentum is smaller than

$\vec{p}_{v}$ in P.)

Having hit the vertical wall the ball climbs steep (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1k1003/figure_1.png>`A). A parabolic trajectory follows. On hitting the floor in $\mathrm{R}$, the friction force is directed to the right ({numref}`Figure {number} <1k1003/figure_1.png>`B). The impulse $\int F_{r} d t$ is large enough to make the component

$\vec{p}_{h}$ change direction and $\bar{M}=\vec{r} \times \vec{F}_{R}$ is inducing a counter clockwise rotation. It bounces towards $\mathrm{S}$ and again $F_{R}$ is directed to the inner side of the parabola, making the component $\vec{p}_{h}$ reverse direction and $\bar{M}=\vec{r} \times \vec{F}_{R}$ inducing clockwise rotation. And so on.
  
## Remarks
- Practicing this demonstration against a real wall will learn that this part of the demonstration can also be appreciated on its own. Having the right speed and right angle, a very high climbing ball will be the result of your practicing. {numref}`Figure {number} <1k1003/figure_1.png>`A shows the explanation of this phenomenon: After bouncing at $\mathrm{Q}$, $\vec{p}_{v}$ has a very high value.
- A nice variation to this demonstration is the "drunken student" (sorry, "drunken sailor"). To throw a ball that follows such a staggering trajectory, see {numref}`Figure {number} <1k1003/figure_2.png>`.    
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k1003/figure_2.png  
---  
.
```
  
## Sources
 *  Walker, J., Roundabout, the Physics of Rotation in the Everyday World, pag. 8-12. 
 *  American Journal of Physics, pag. 875-883 (Vol. 72-7; 2004).
  