# 07 Nutation (2)  
  
## Aim   
 To give a geometric description of nutation    
  
## Subjects   
* 1Q50 (Gyros)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q5007/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Model (see Diagram and Figures).
    
  
## Presentation   
Watching a nutating object we observe that the body-axis makes a conical movement (see [Nutation](../1Q5006%20Nutation/1Q5006.md). This movement of the body-axis is visualized in our model by rotating the $L$-axis by hand (see Figures). 
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q5007/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

## Explanation   
$L$, wand body-axis are in one plane. While moving, $L$ remains fixed in space, so movement of that plane has to take place around $L$.

The fixed cone (so-called "space cone") contains wand this $\omega$ turns around $L$. To show the position of $\omega$ with rerspect to the body axis, a cone around the body-axis (so-called body-cone) is visualized. This body-cone also contains $\omega$. So in our model the position of $\omega$ is seen where the two cones touch each other. While rotating, the movement of the body-axis around $L$ (nutation) and the movement of the momentary rotation-axis $(\omega)$ around the symmetry-axis can be observed. 
  
## Remarks
- The model is made in such a way that the two cones grip each other (teeth on the inside of the rim of the body-cone grip the wooden bars of the space-cone), so that the cones are not slipping. This is needed since there is only one $\omega$ while in our model $\omega$ is in two cones.
- Our model represents the movement of a disk-shaped nutating object $\left(I_{3}>I_{1}\right)$. Visualizing of a nutating bar-shaped object $\left(I_{1}>I_{3}\right)$ needs a model having the body-cone revolving with its outside around a fixed space-cone.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Borghouts, A.N., Inleiding in de Mechanica, pag. 224-227 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 222-226 Nutation (2)
    