# 04 Precession (2) 
  
## Aim   
 To show precession (and to show the validity of vector-addition)    
  
## Subjects   
* 1Q50 (Gyros)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q5004/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Bicycle-wheel with handles. 
 *  2 pieces of rope. 
 *  Pair of scissors.
    
  
## Presentation

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EutntrR6P5E?si=VnCF6d6sR37rEBOn"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

The wheel is supported by strings tied to both handles. The wheel is given a fast spin by hand. Now one of the supporting strings is cut. The wheel starts to precess about a vertical axis (while its own horizontal axis of spin slowly descends toward the vertical). As the spin of the wheel diminishes, the wheel precesses more rapidly. 
  
## Explanation   
Since angular momentum is a vector quantity that may be conveniently represented by a vector parallel to the axis of spin, the combination of two angular momenta may be treated by the parallelogram law. Thus, whenever a gyroscope is acted upon by a torque tending to produce rotation about an axis perpendicular to the axis of spin, the gyroscope will precess about a third axis perpendicular to the other two.

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q5004/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```
The spinning wheel has an angular momentum of $I \omega_{0}$. This is represented by a vector parallel to the axis of spin (see  {numref}`Figure {number} <1q5004/figure_1.png>` a). When one of the strings is cut, then gravitational torque ( $\mathrm{mgs}$ ) is added to the system (see  {numref}`Figure {number} <1q5004/figure_1.png>` b ). This torque tends to change $I \omega_{0}$, so $I \omega_{b}$ moves into the direction of $m g s$ (see  {numref}`Figure {number} <1q5004/figure_1.png>` c).

It can be shown that the speed of precession $\left(\omega_{p}\right)$ is given by $\omega_{p}=\frac{m g s}{I \omega_{f}}$, so slowing down of $\omega_{0}$ increases $\omega_{0}$. The precession will also be more rapid by adding a weight to the unsupported handle.    
  
## Sources
 *  Sutton, Richard Manliffe, Demonstration experiments in Physics, pag. 79
  
