# 08 No Tipping Allowed 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show that a cylinder that slides to a stop tips only if its diameter-to-height ratio is less than the reciprocal of the coefficient of kinetic friction.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1K20 (Friction)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k2008/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```

## Equipment
- 5 pvc cylinders, $\varnothing= 80 \mathrm{~mm}$

    - $l_{1}=285 \mathrm{~mm}$

    - $l_{2}=320 \mathrm{~mm}$

    - $l_{3}=335 \mathrm{~mm}$

    - $l_{4}=350 \mathrm{~mm}$

    - $l_{5}=385 \mathrm{~mm}$

- Horizontal surface (smooth table)
     
  
## Presentation   

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pQoVApmwdNY?si=xM65rjpKTJKm_dpN"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

The lateral standing cylinder is given a push by hand. (Push the cylinder on the bottom half, a number of times from left to right and vice versa).

Cylinder $l_{1}$ never tips, $l_{5}$ always tips, $l_{2}, l_{3}$ and $l_{4}$ tip sometimes/often ( $l_{3}$  tips roughly $50 \%$ of the times).   
  
## Explanation   
 On the verge of tipping, the upward normal force acts at the leading edge of the base ({numref}`Figure {number} <1k2008/figure_1.png>`, point A). 

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k2008/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

In the decelerating reference frame ma acts on the center of mass, along with the vertical gravitational force mg. (See {numref}`Figure {number} <1k2008/figure_2.png>`).     
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1k2008/figure_2.png  
---  
. 
```
When the resultant of $ma$ and $mg$ is directed to point $\mathrm{A}$, the cylinder is on the verge of tipping. {numref}`Figure {number} <1k2008/figure_2.png>` shows that in that case $\mu_{k}=d / h$.
  
## Remarks   
When constructing the demonstration, you need to know the value of $\mu_{k}$ before you can cut the cylinder to the proper heights. $\mu_{k}$ can easily be determined by placing a short cylinder on an inclined board and finding the angle of incline for which the cylinder slides at constant speed after being given an initial push. $\mu_{k}=\tan (\alpha)$ ( $\alpha=$ angle of incline).   
  
## Sources
 *  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 43 
 *  Friedrich, Artur, Handbuch der experimentellen Schulphysik, part 2, Mechanik der festen Körper, pag. 128
  
