# 03 Stable Wheel 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show how a rolling bicycle wheel "organizes" its stability.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1Q60 (Rotational Stability)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q6003_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
- Small bicycle wheel; $\varnothing=40 \mathrm{~cm}$ (or any other wheel or disc).
     
  
## Presentation   
- Place the wheel upright on the floor. On release it falls down immediately.

- Then the wheel is released while turning. It rolls over the floor and remains upright for a much longer time.

    The second observation made is that it will follow a curve when it starts falling down. Also notice that the curve it makes, is into the direction of the "falling down" (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q6003_figure_1.png>`).  

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q6003_figure_1.png  

.
```
  
## Explanation   
{numref}`Figure {number} <1q6003_figure_2.png>`A shows the wheel turning. The rotation is indicated by means of the vector $\underline{\omega}$. Due to some disturbance, the wheel inclines due to gravity: a torque ( $\tau$ ) is acting on the wheel (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q6003_figure_2.png>`). 

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q6003_figure_2.png  

. 
```
Due to this torque the direction of the vector $\underline{\omega}$ is changed: $\underline{\omega}$ is changed into the direction of $\tau$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q6003_figure_2.png>`C), so the wheel will make a curve while rolling. This continues because the vectors $\underline{\omega}$ and $\tau$ remain perpendicular to each other.

Also can be seen now that the larger the inclination, the sharper the curve it will make since vector $\vec{r}$ increases, making $\vec{tau}$ larger.