# 02 Negative Temperature Coefficient 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show how the resistance of a semiconductor (P-Ge) depends on temperature.    
  
## Subjects   
* 5D20 (Resistivity and Temperature)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 5d2002_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Bar of P-Ge 
 *  Power supply 
 *  Current meter with large display 
 *  Gas flame

## Presentation   
Set the Ammeter at a $1\mathrm{~A}$-scale. The voltage of the power supply is raised until a current of about $0.05\mathrm{~A}$ flows in the circuit. The bar of $\mathrm{P}-\mathrm{Ge}$ is heated by the gas flame and soon the current rises to a much higher value. After a short time of heating the gas flame can be removed and the current continues to rise, faster and faster, only limited by the power supply.   
  
## Explanation   
The resistance of a semiconductor drops with temperature because at a higher temperature there are more free charge-carriers in it.

The current flowing in the material heats it up: $P_{e l}=\frac{V^{2}}{R}$ The heat leaving the piece of material is proportional to $\Delta T: P_{\text {out }} \propto \Delta T$ (Newton cooling). When $P_{\text {out }}=P_{e l}$ there will be thermal equilibrium and the temperature is constant. Reaching such an equilibrium takes some time.

In this demonstration $R$ lowers due to a rise in temperature and so $P_{e l}$, rises due to a rise in temperature. When this rise is faster than the rise of $P_{\text {out }}$ an ever faster rising of $\Delta T$ (like an avalanche) will result.