
# 05 Coriolis (3) 
  
## Aim   
 To elucidate the direction of the Coriolis force on our rotating Earth.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1E20 (Rotating Reference Frames) 
* 1E30 (Coriolis Effect)   

## Diagram
    
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 1e2005_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Globe. 
 *  Flexible straw ($v$ and $\omega$ in Diagram B). 
 *  Toothpick ($F$ in Diagram B).
    
  
## Presentation   
On the globe, our local position is indicated by sticking a small puppet at our coordinates (Delft, $52^{\circ}$ northern latitude; see Diagram A). On the globe, the sense of rotation is indicated by arrows stuck to the equator. This sense of rotation is also marked by the $\omega_{0}$-vector stuck into the North Pole.

The flexible straw is used as a resource to indicate simultaneously the direction of $\omega_{0}$ and the direction in which an object is moving (velocity $v$ ). The long arm of the straw is used to indicate the direction of $\omega_{0}$, and the short arm is used to indicate the direction of $v$. Applying the corkscrew rule ( $\vec{F}_{\text {cor }}=-2 m(\vec{\omega} \times \vec{v})$ ), the direction of $F_{\text {cor }}$ is indicated by sticking the toothpick into the elbow of the flexible straw (see Diagram). The advantage of using the flexible straw is that easily the angle between $\omega_{o}$ and $v$ can be changed; the toothpick can be easily shifted in and out the elbow when the corkscrew rule indicates that the direction of $F_{\text {cor }}$ is different (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e2005_figure_1.png>`).     

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 1e2005_figure_1.png  

. 
```
   
  
## Remarks
*  On the Southern hemisphere, this straw-toothpick vector model can be used when you keep $\omega_{0}$ pointing upwards, meaning that you have to keep the model a distance away from the globe.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 182 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 137-145 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 197-202; 205-210 
 *  Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 291-292
  
