# 01 Current Loop in Magnetic Field 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show torques and forces on a current loop in a magnetic field.   
  
## Subjects   
* 5H50 (Torques on Coils)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
- Two Neodymium magnets fixed in clamps.
- Coil $\left(n=500 ; I_{\max }=2.5 \mathrm{~A}\right)$ with a piece of red tape at one side. The coil is suspended by thin thread, so it can rotate easily (see Diagram).
- Power supply, $30\mathrm{~V}/10\mathrm{~A}$.
- Switch and Two-way switch.
- Array of compass-needles.
- Paperclip (to show the presence of a magnetic field).
- Camera and screen to show the demo to a large audience.

## Safety   
 
- The Neodymium magnets are very strong. If these magnets are not handled carefully, there is risk of serious injury. The magnets are fixed in clamps and stored with a thick piece of sheet between them.

-Carefully slide them apart when you use them, to prevent your fingers becoming trapped between them.

-Keep them several meters away from magnetic information carriers.

-Never operate the magnets in explosive environments, since they generate sparks!
     
  
## Presentation   
 Using the array of compass needles we show that there is a uniform magnetic field between the permanent magnets (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5h5001_figure_1.png>`).   
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_1.png  

. 
```

Close to the magnets the field is strongly divergent/convergent (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5h5001_figure_2.png>`).   
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_2.png  

. 
```
Then the coil is suspended between the two magnets (see Diagram). Connecting the power supply to the coil shows that the coil makes a rotation and lines up with the magnetic field (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5h5001_figure_3.png>`). There it remains at rest.

Conclusion is that in a homogeneous magnetic field a current carrying coil (a dipole) experiences a torque that lines up that dipole with the field. And in that uniform field there is no net force.

```{figure} figures/figure_3.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_3.png  

. 
```
Then the coil is displaced a little from its central position: It attracts itself towards one of the magnets and sticks there (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5h5001_figure_4.png>`).  
```{figure} figures/figure_4.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_4.png  

. 
```
Conclusion is that in a non-uniform field there is a net force on a current loop (dipole).  
  
## Explanation   
There are Lorentz-forces on all sides of the coil. The forces on the bottom- and topside of the coil cancel (they only tend to stretch the coil). The two forces on the sides are also equal and opposite but they do generate a torque $\vec{N} . \vec{N}=\vec{m} \times \vec{B}$ ( $\vec{B}$ is the magnetic field and $\vec{A}, \vec{A}$ being the area of the current loop).

When the field is non-uniform, there is a radial component of $\mathrm{B}$ and there will be a net force towards the magnet (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5h5001_figure_5.png>`).
```{figure} figures/figure_5.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 5h5001_figure_5.png  

. 
```
   
  
## Remarks
 *  The lining up of a current loop in a uniform field is an example of what dipoles do in a material. So it can be used as an example to present para-magnetism.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Griffiths, D.J., Introduction to Electrodynamics pag.255-258.
  