# 06 Recoil of a Water Jet   
  
## Aim   
 To show an example of Newton's third law.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1H10 (Action and Reaction) 
* 1N22 (Rockets)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1h1006_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
- Tube with a T-junction, $\varnothing 10$
- Rubber hose (about 2 meters)
- Faucet
- A tray to catch the water
    
  
## Presentation   
The rubber hose with a T-junction hangs vertically down. Opening the faucet makes the end of the hose move away. 

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1h1006_figure_1.png  

. 
```
When a plate is held in the water-jet, nothing changes.

When the plate is fixed to the end of one side of the T-junction, the hose stays vertically in its position.

  
## Explanation   
To convert a downward water flow into a sideways water flow, the T-junction has to exert a force on the water. The reaction to this force is responsible for the recoil to the other side. When a plate is placed in the outgoing water stream, it also exerts a force on the plate. When this plate is fixed to the T-junction, these two forces cancel, so there is no recoil    
  
## Remarks   
This demonstration can be performed by the students themselves, by giving each of them a flexible soda straw, giving it a $90^{\circ}$ bend ({numref}`Figure {number} <1h1006_figure_2.png>`).  

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1h1006_figure_2.png  

. 
```

Blowing hard in the long part of the straw, the free end recoils. The no-recoil can be observed when a small plastic bag is attached to the end of the straw.
  
## Sources
 *  Friedrich, Artur, Handbuch der experimentellen Schulphysik, part 2, Mechanik der festen Körper, pag. 169 
 *  Ehrlich, R., Why Toast Lands Jelly-Side Down: Zen and the Art of Physics Demonstrations, pag. 34 
 *  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 35
  
