# 03 Lloyds Mirror 
  
## Aim   
 To show the interference of two coherent beams of light.    
  
## Subjects   
* 6D10 (Interference From Two Sources)   

## Diagram
 Diagram   
  
## Equipment   
 *  Laser 
 *  Simple lens (we use $+10 \mathrm{~mm}$) 
 *  Surface mirror 
 *  White screen/wall
     
  
## Presentation   
The room is darkened and the laser is switched on. By means of the $+10 \mathrm{~mm}$-lens an illuminated disk is projected on the white screen. The surface mirror is placed parallel to the diverging light beam (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6d1003_figure_0.png>`A)    

```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d1003_figure_0.png  

. 
```
and then turned just a little, so that the outer rays of the beam are reflected (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6d1003_figure_0.png>`B). In the light spot on the wall the fringes are visible now.
  
  
## Explanation   
 A portion of the wavefront is reflected from S (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6d1003_figure_1.png>`).     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 6d1003_figure_1.png  

. 
```
The other portion proceeds directly to the screen. Interference occurs in the region where the two portions are superimposed $S$ and its mirrorimage $S_{1}$ can be considered as separate coherent sources, placed a distance $a$ apart. Then the separation ( $\Delta y$ ) between the fringes is given by $\Delta y \approx \frac{S}{a} \lambda$ ( $s$ being the distance between the plane of the two sources and the screen).  
  
## Remarks   
In the demonstration the distance between the fringes can be enlarged by placing the screen not perpendicular but more parallel to the beam.    
  
## Sources
 *  Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 391-392 
 *  Leybold-Heraeus, Physikalische Handblätter, pag. DK 535.412;b
  