# 02 Transformer 
    
  
## Aim   
 To verify the relationship between the voltages and the number of turns in the coils.    
  
## Subjects   
* 5K30 (Transformers)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 5k3002_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  $220 \mathrm{~V}$ mains safety switchbox. 
 *  U-core with bar and clamping device. 
 *  Coil, $n=500$. 
 *  Multiscale voltmeter with large display. 
 *  Long wire.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  Applying the $220 \mathrm{~V}$ mains is done via a safety switch box that switches both connectors ON/OFF. When ON, a red light appears on the box; when OFF a green light shows, indicating that it is safe to manipulate the circuit.
     
  
## Presentation   
 The demonstration is set up as shown in Diagram and {numref}`Figure {number} <5k3002_figure_1.png>`.     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 5k3002_figure_1.png  

. 
```
     
The $220 \mathrm{~V}$ is switched on and the students can read on the $\mathrm{V}$-meter that in the loop around the core a voltage of around $.4 \mathrm{~V}$ is induced.

Then the demonstrator makes the wire go round the core in two loops. Again the induced voltage is read and a doubling is observed. Then make the wire go round the core three times (see {numref}`Figure {number} <5k3002_figure_2.png>`). And so on, as long as the length of the wire enables it.

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 5k3002_figure_2.png  

. 
```

Clearly the proportionality between induced voltage and the number of turns is observed.   
  
## Explanation   
When an alternating voltage $\left(E_{p}\right)$ is applied across the primary coil of a transformer and there is no flux leakage, then the emf induced in the secondary coil is given by: $E_{s}=\frac{n_{s}}{n_{p}} E_{p}$. This demonstration verifies this:

- 1 turn: $E_{\mathrm{s}}=1 / 500(220)=.44 \mathrm{~V}$.

- 2 turns: $E_{s}=2 / 500(220)=.88 \mathrm{~V}$.

- Etc.  
  
## Sources
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 527-529
  
