# 02 Mathematical pendulum (2) Large angle    
  
## Aim   
To show that the period of motion of a simple pendulum depends on the angle the pendulum makes with the vertical.    
  
## Subjects   
* 3A10 (Pendula)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 3a1002_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
- Pendulum; brass bob attached to a threaded rod $(I=50 \mathrm{~cm})$ and connected to a support with ball bearing.
- Large cardboard with the principal angles of deflection indicated on it (see Diagram).
- Photogate
- Computerinterface.
- Computer with data-acquisition system. (we use PASCO Science Workshop)

    
  
## Presentation   
The photogate is placed just offset the rest-position of the pendulum. The data-acquisition system is set up in such a way that a graph of periodtimes can be presented. The data-acquisition is started, and by hand the pendulum is given a deflection of almost $180^{\circ}$ and released. When $\theta$ has reached angles smaller than $90^{\circ}$, the data-acquisition is stopped. During the data-acquisition the students observe the graph displayed (see red line in {numref}`Figure {number} <3a1002_figure_1.png>`).

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 3a1002_figure_1.png  

. 
```

(This means that the expected range of the axes of the graph have to be prepared before the demonstration is started.)

A second run is made, giving the pendulum the smallest deflection possible. After about $10-20$ registrations of $T$ the data-acquisition is stopped. The complete graph can be observed and discussed now.    
  
## Explanation   
The equation that describes the motion of the mass $m$ is given by $a_{x}=\frac{d^{2 s}}{d t^{2}}=-g \sin \theta$ (x-direction along the tangent of the circle; see {numref}`Figure {number} <3a1002_figure_2.png>`A). This is not a simple harmonic motion since $\sin \theta$ is not proportional to $s$.

Only for small amplitude oscillations $\sin \theta \approx \theta=\frac{S}{l}$ and the equation of motion reduces to $\frac{d^{2} s}{d t^{2}}=-\frac{g}{l} s$ This is the differential equation for simple harmonic motion. Then the period is given by $T=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{l}{g}}$

For large amplitudes we need $a_{x}=-g \sin \theta$ in stead of $a_{x}=-g \theta$. Since $\sin \theta<\theta$, this means that $a_{x}$ is smaller than the small-amplitude equation indicates: The mass will need more time than $T=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{l}{g}}$ to reach its maximum deflection. In other words: $T$ is larger than $2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{l}{g}}$.

(For an exact solution to the equation of motion: see SourcesXX.)  
  
## Remarks
 *  Also see the demonstration ["Mathematical pendulum (1) - Simple harmonic motion"](../3A1001%20Mathematical%20Pendulum/3A1001.md). With that demonstration the effect on the acceleration a can be observed very well. 
 *  When you observe the pendulum directly by eye it can be seen directly that the period of oscillation is larger at larger angles. 
 *  The software is setup in such a way that the period is presented after the pendulum has passed three times through the photogate. Every next period is presented after every second passage (see {numref}`Figure {number} <3a1002_figure_2.png>`B).    

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 3a1002_figure_2.png  

. 
```

*  Since the system measures the complete period the position of the photogate can be at any arbitrary point along the arc of motion.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Borghouts, A.N., Inleiding in de Mechanica, pag. 129-131 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 72-73 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 91-93
  