# 05 Sliding Ladder 
    
## Aim   
 To show an example where the concept 'impulse' explains the phenomenon.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1N10 (Impulse and Thrust)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1n1005/figure_0
---  
. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Cover glass (we use $50\times50\times1 \mathrm{~mm}$). 
 *  Wooden block (we use $7\times3.5\times2 \mathrm{~cm}$7×3.5×2 cm). 
 *  Overhead projector.
     
  
## Presentation   
**Preparation**

The glass of the overhead projector and the cover glass are cleaned and polished. 

**Presentation**

The cover glass rests against the wooden block (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1n1005/figure_0>`A). By hand, the inclination of the cover glass is decreased by pulling the wooden block very slowly to the right (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1n1005/figure_0>`B). At a certain moment the cover glass starts sliding: It moves downwards and away from the wooden block. Pose the question to the students: "What makes the cover glass move away from the wooden block?"   
  
## Explanation   
During the sliding movement, five forces are acting: The weight $G$, the normal forces $N_A$ and $N_B$ and the friction forces in $A$ and $B$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1n1005/figure_1>`; the friction forces are neglected).   

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1n1005/figure_1 
---  
. 
```

At a certain moment in the movement, $B$ leaves the wooden block. This is only possible if the cover glass has a component in its velocity that is directed to the left and correspondingly a momentum to the left. The only force directed to the left is $N_B$. $N_B$ itself is not moving to the left, but gives the cover glass an impulse to the left equal to $\int_{t_{1}}^{t_{2}} N_{B} dt$, $t_{2}-t_{1}$ being the time that $B$ slides the vertical wall. (Will the cover glass leave the vertical wall before point $B$ hits the ground?)

After some time the movement to the left stops due to friction forces between the horizontally sliding cover glass and the glass of the overhead projector.   
  
## Remarks
 *  Notice that the force $N_B$ does no work! 
 *  This demonstration can be easily performed in a simulation program. The advantage then is that the friction on the ground can be made zero and the ladder (cover glass) will continue moving over the ground. Such a simulation is a useful follow-up of the demonstration in our real world. Also the question raised in the Explanation about the sliding point B can be answered by observing the movement of point B in that simulation.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Borghouts, A.N., Inleiding in de Mechanica, pag. 92 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 123 
 *  Young, H.D. and Freeman, R.A., University Physics, pag. 228-229
  