# 02 Centre of Rotation 
     
## Aim   

To show that a free rotating body rotates around its centre of mass.    


## Subjects   

* 1D40 (Motion of the Center of Mass) 
* 1Q60 (Rotational Stability)   


## Diagram   

```{figure} figures/figure_1D40.02a.jpg  
---  
width: 70%  
name: demo1D4002/figure_0
---   
.
``` 
```{figure} figures/figure_1D40.02b.jpg  
---  
width: 70%  
name: demo1D4002/figure_1D4002b
---   
.
``` 
```{figure} figures/figure_1D40.02c.jpg  
---  
width: 70%  
name: demo1D4002/figure_1D4002c
---   
.
``` 


## Equipment

- Two different wooden spheres $\left(\mathrm{d}_{1}=5 \mathrm{~cm}\right.$ and $\left.\mathrm{d}_{2}=4 \mathrm{~cm}\right)$, connected by a light stick.
- Two different wooden spheres ( $\mathrm{d}_{1}=5 \mathrm{~cm}$ and $\mathrm{d}_{2}=4 \mathrm{~cm}$ ), connected by a rubber band (length unwound around $50 \mathrm{~cm}$ ).
- Board with square grid $\left(10 \times 10 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}\right)$.
- Video camera on tripod.
- Projector to project image of square grid to the audience.
  
## Presentation   

The two spheres, connected by a light stick, are balanced (see {numref}`Figure {number} <demo1D4002/figure_0>`) to show where the centre of mass ($\mathrm{CM}$) is located. The location of the $\mathrm{CM}$ divides the distance ( $d$ ) between the two centres of the spheres in roughly $\frac{1}{3} d$ and $\frac{2}{3} d$.

The system of two spheres connected by a twisted rubber band (see {numref}`Figure {number} <demo1D4002/figure_0>` and Remarks) is placed on the gridboard, and then left by itself. The system begins to rotate as the twisted rubber band unwinds. The system rotates around a fixed point. This can be recognized as the $\mathrm{CM}$. This can be related to the first part of the demonstration. Note that during the rotation, the distance between the spheres increases, but its centre of rotation keeps the ratio $\frac{1}{3}:\frac{2}{3}$!


## Explanation   

As no external forces are acting, the $\mathrm{CM}$ has to remain at its position on the board according to Newton's first law. (Note: When the system rotates around any other point but the $\mathrm{CM}$, the $\mathrm{CM}$ performs a rotation, and an external torque should be needed for that.)     

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: demo1D4002/figure_1
---  
.
``` 


The body rotates around an axis perpendicular to $d$. When no external forces are acting, the angular momentum vector $\vec{L}$ remains constant. The body in our demonstration consists of two masses: $m_{1}$ and $m_{2}$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <demo1D4002/figure_1>`a).

$$
\begin{aligned}
\vec{L}&=\vec{L}_{1}+\vec{L}_{2}\\ 
\vec{L}&=\vec{R}_{1} \times m_{1} \vec{v}_{1}+\vec{R}_{2} \times m_{2} \vec{v}_{2}
\end{aligned}
$$

The axis of rotation characterizes itself by the fact that, at any position on this axis, $\vec{L}$ will have the same magnitude and direction (at $O^{'}$ the horizontal components of $L_{1 a}$ and $L_{2 a}$ cancel, and their vertical components add up to $\vec{L}$: see Sources). This means that only one axis of rotation is possible. When, for instance, an axis of rotation is chosen passing through the centre of $\mathrm{m}_{1}$, then the total angular momentum adds up to $L_{2 b}$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <demo1D4002/figure_1>` b). And so, being constant in magnitude, its direction constantly changes (describing a cone). Such a situation needs an external torque.

In our demonstration, there is no external torque, and the sphere-system rotates around an axis somewhere between the two spheres ({numref}`Figure {number} <demo1D4002/figure_2>`). At $O$, $\vec{L}=\vec{R}_{1} \times m_{1} \vec{v}_{1}+\vec{R}_{2} \times m_{2} \vec{v}_{2}$, directed along the axis of rotation. At $O^{'}$, the horizontal components of $L_{1}$ and $L_{2}$ need to cancel in order to keep $L$ along the axis of rotation.

$$\left|\vec{L}_{1}\right|=\frac{R_{1} m_{1} v_{1}}{\cos \alpha}$$

$$L_{1 h}=\frac{R_{1} m_{1} v_{1}}{\cos \alpha} \sin \alpha=R_{1} m_{1} v_{1} \tan \alpha=m_{1} v_{1} y$$

In the same way: 

$$L_{2 h}=m_{2} v_{2} y, v=\omega R \text{, so } L_{1 h}=m_{1} \omega R_{1} y L_{1 h}=m_{1} \omega R_{1} y$$

and

$$L_{2 h}=m_{2} \omega R_{2} y L_{2 h}=m_{2} \omega R_{2} y$$ 

These two are equal when $m_{1} R_{1}=m_{2} R_{2}$, this holds when the axis of rotation passes through the $\mathrm{CM}$. 

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: demo1D4002/figure_2
---   
.
```

## Remarks

- The easiest way to wind the rubber band: hold the small sphere in your hand and whirl the large sphere round over the ground.
- The wooden spheres having diameters of $4 -$ and $5 \mathrm{~cm}$ will have a mass ratio of $1$ to $1.95$ , so very close to a factor $2$.
- See also the demonstration [Dumb-Bell](../../../1Q%20rot%20dyn/1Q40%20Cons%20of%20Angular%20Momentum/1Q4007%20Dumb%20Bell/1Q4007.md)


## Sources   

 * Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 139-141 
 * PSSC, College Physics, pag. 352-354  
