# 06 Microwave Oven Standing Waves 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show a standing electromagnetic wave.    
  
## Subjects   
* 3B22 (Standing Waves) 
* 5N10 (Transmission Lines and Antennas)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 3b2206_figure_0.png  

. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Microwave oven. The oven is adapted so it can operate with its door open. 
 *  Piece of cardboard covered with marsh-mallows. 
 *  Video-camera and projector to project an image of the marsh-mallows to the students.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  We operate the microwave oven with its door open, so keep enough distance away from it. One hazard is well known and documented: As the lens of the eye has no cooling blood flow, it is particularly prone to overheating when exposed to microwave radiation. This heating can in turn lead to a higher incidence of cataracts in later life. 
 *  There is also a considerable electrical hazard around the magnetron tube, as it requires a high voltage power supply.
      
  
## Presentation   
Shortly the operation of the microwave oven is explained to the students. This is done by showing the cavity magnetron to them and explaining its operation (see {numref}`Figure {number} <3b2206_figure_1.png>`). See for instance: https://www.radartutorial.eu/08.transmitters/tx08.en.html

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 3b2206_figure_1.png  

. 
```

The oven is switched ON for around 2 minutes. After around 30 seconds it is observed that the marsh-mallows rise. After two minutes it is clearly observed that the rising occurs only at certain spots (see {numref}`Figure {number} <3b2206_figure_2.png>`).

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
:width: 70%  
:label: 3b2206_figure_2.png  

. 
```
 We measure $d =10 \mathrm{~cm}$.   
  
## Explanation   
The rising of the marshmallows at certain spots only, shows that there is heating only at certain spots. This can be explained by assuming a standing em-wave in the cavity that the oven is.

### Discussion:
 Knowing that the magnetron-frequency is $2.45 \mathrm{Ghz}$, makes that the wavelength in air of the em-wave equals $12.2 \mathrm{~cm}$. Then possible standing waves are standing waves with $n(12.2) \mathrm{cm}[n=1,2,3, \ldots]$, and we expect heating at multiples of half wavelength distances, so at $\mathrm{n}(6.1) \mathrm{cm}$. We measure heating hills at $10 \mathrm{~cm}$ separation (see {numref}`Figure {number} <3b2206_figure_2.png>`). This means that the standing wave has a wavelength of $20 \mathrm{~cm}$. This can only mean that the frequency of the em-wave inside the oven is less than $2.45 \mathrm{MHz}$. supposing it is half that frequency, then we expect standing waves with $\mathrm{n}(24.4) \mathrm{cm}$, and heating hills at $12.2 \mathrm{~cm}$ separation. That we measure $10 \mathrm{~cm}$ can be caused by the dielectric constant of marshmallows being $>1$, causing a smaller wavelength inside the marshmallows.     
  
## Sources
 *  https://www.radartutorial.eu/08.transmitters/tx08.en.html  