# 01 Super Balls, Double Ball Drop 
    
## Aim   
 Showing that when a superball of small mass resting on top of a superball of large mass is dropped from a low height, the small ball ideally rebounds to nearly nine times its original height.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1E10 (Moving Reference Frames) 
* 1N20 (Conservation of Linear Momentum)   
  
<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Oxte-YmnnHI?si=PzP00e48WqzlzpsX"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>


## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1001/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```
      
```{figure} figures/balls.jpg 
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1001/figure_X.png  
---  
. 
```

## Equipment   
 *  1 superball of large mass (basketball). 
 *  1 superball of small mass (table-tennis ball). 
 *  Astro-superball"
      
## Presentation   
A superball of small mass is dropped and rebounces almost to the original dropping height. Next the superball of small mass is held about $10 \mathrm{~cm}$ above the superball of large mass. This combination is dropped simultaneously and now, after striking the floor, the small ball takes off and can reach a height nine times as high as the original dropping height.   

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/U7vwTFAxFtM?si=euLDQ9qDZOvifWMu"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

## Explanation   
Just before striking the floor both balls have a velocity $v$. Just after the combination hits the floor, the ball of large mass moves up with a velocity $v$ whereas the ball of small mass is still moving down with a velocity $v$, making the two balls relative speed $2 v$. So, the ball of small mass is approaching the ball of large mass with a velocity of $2 v$. When the collision is elastic, the velocity of the ball of small mass after the collision is again $2 v$, but now in the opposite direction. So the ball of small mass moves away from the ball of large mass with a velocity $2 v$. Relative to the floor, the ball of large mass moves up with a velocity $v$, so the ball of small mass moves up with a velocity $3 v$ relative to the floor. (See {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1001/figure_1.png>`)  

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1001/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

The small ball would have gone up with a velocity $v$ if it had just hit the floor, but now it takes off with a velocity $3 v$. Because $m g h=1 / 2 m v^{2}$, a 3 times higher take-off velocity means that it goes 9 times higher.      
  
## Remarks
*   Do not rest the table-tennis ball on the basketball and drop it as such a combination. When this is done, the table-tennis ball stays fixed to the basketball (aerodynamic reason) and for this demonstration it is needed that on hitting the ground there is some distance between the two balls. 
*   It is recommended that the dropping of the balls is practiced, especially dropping the small and large ball simultaneously. 
*   An extension of the demonstration is to drop a stack of three or even more balls ("Astro-superball"; see Diagram. When a three-ball combination is dropped, the top ball approaches a maximum of 49 times the initial release height. In order to drop the Astroball-stack perfectly vertical, wet your fingers holding the stack and slowly let it slip away. 
*   The experiment does not perform very well on a wooden floor.
   
  
## Sources   
 
*  The Physics Teacher, vol. 21, no. 7, pag. 466, Superball problem, G. Stroink 
*  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 60 
*  Stark Verlag, Astro-Blaster 11938
  