# 01 Confusing Mirrors (mirrors at 90 degrees) 

  
## Aim   
 To show just plane mirrors in which the images are rather complicated.    
  
## Subjects   
* 6A10 (Reflection From Flat Surfaces)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6a1001_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Planar mirror. 
 *  Two hinged planar mirrors. 
 *  Revolving double mirror; the mirrors stand perpendicular to each other. 
 *  Three planar mirrors arranged as a corner cube. .
    
  
## Presentation   
1. Look into the planar mirror.

As is known very well,the image of the left hand is a right hand. But why are top and down not interchanged?.

2. Look into the hinged double mirror (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_1.png>`), the angle between the two mirrors ( $\alpha$ is larger than $90^{\circ}$. Moving your eyes you see left and right an image of your head ({numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_1.png>`A). Left/right is interchanged in the images.    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6a1001_figure_1.png  

. 
```
Now make the $\alpha$ smaller than $90^{\circ}$. At around $\alpha=60^{\circ}$ you see four images (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_1.png>`B): The image in the left mirror is again imaged in the right mirror and viceversa.

Slowly the $\alpha$ is made smaller and the two imaged images fall together (at $\alpha=90^{\circ}$ ) (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_1.png>`C). Move your head on one side to observe this particular image and see that in this image left is still left.

3. Look at the revolving double mirror (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_2.png>`A). Turn it round slowly and observe that you are upside down (your image is rotated $180^{\circ}$ when the mirror.  

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6a1001_figure_2.png  

. 
```

4. Look (close one eye) into the arrangement of three planar mirrors (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6a1001_figure_3.png>`).
  
```{figure} figures/figure_3.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6a1001_figure_3.png  

. 
```
Observe:
- left remains left and up becomes down; 
- your eye remains caught in the middle of the arrangement; it won't help moving your head up-down/right-left.  
  
## Explanation   
 For explanation see the demonstration [Corner cube](../6A1002%20Corner%20Cube/6A1002.md).
  
## Sources
 *  Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 178-180 and 195 
 *  Stewart, J, Calculus, pag. 791 and 796
  