
```{figure} /figures/ready.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 1E10.01 Super Balls, Double Ball Drop 
    
  
## Aim   
 Showing that when a superball of small mass resting on top of a superball of large mass is dropped from a low height, the small ball ideally rebounds to nearly nine times its original height.    
  
## Subjects   
 1E10 (Moving Reference Frames) 1N20 (Conservation of Linear Momentum)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  1 superball of large mass (basketball). 
 *  1 superball of small mass (table-tennis ball). 
 *  ("Astro-superball".)
     
  
## Presentation   
 A superball of small mass is dropped and rebounces almost to the original droppingheight. Next the superball of small mass is held about $10 \mathrm{~cm}$ above the superball of large mass. This combination is dropped simultaneously and now, after striking the floor, the small ball takes off and can reach a height nine times as high as the original droppingheight.   
  
## Explanation   
Just before striking the floor both balls have a velocity $v$. Just after the combination hits the floor, the ball of large mass moves up with a veloctiy $v$ whereas the ball of small mass is still moving down with a velocity $v$, making the two balls relative speed $2 v$. So, the ball of small mass is approaching the ball of large mass with a velocity of $2 v$. When the collision is elastic, the velocity of the ball of small mass after the collision is again $2 v$, but now in the opposite direction. So the ball of small mass moves away from the ball of large mass with a velocity $2 v$. Relative to the floor, the ball of large mass moves up with a velocity $v$, so the ball of small mass moves up with a velocity $3 v$ relative to the floor. (See {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1001/figure_1.png>`)  

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: 1e1001/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 

The small ball would have gone up with a velocity $v$ if it had just hit the floor, but now it takes off with a velocity $3 v$. Because $m g h=1 / 2 m v^{2}$, a 3 times higher take-off velocity means that it goes 9 times higher.      
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  Do not rest the table-tennis ball on the basketball and drop it as such a combination. When this is done, the table-tennis ball stays fixed to the basketball (aerodynamic reason) and for this demonstration it is needed that on hitting the ground there is some distance between the two balls. 
 *  It is recommended that the dropping of the balls is practiced, especially dropping the small and large ball simultaneously. 
 *  An extension of the demonstration is to drop a stack of three or even more balls ("Astro-superball"; see [Diagram](#diagram)). When a three-ball combination is dropped, the top ball approaches a maximum of 49 times the initial release height. In order to drop the Astroball-stack perfectly vertical, wetten your fingers holding the stack and slowly let it slip away. 
 *  The experiment does not perform very well on a woorden floor.
   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  The Physics Teacher, vol. 21, no. 7, pag. 466, Superball problem, G. Stroink 
 *  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 60 
 *  Stark Verlag, Astro-Blaster 11938
  