# 08 Rugbyball 
  
## Aim   
 To show how a rotating rugby ball lifts itself    
  
## Subjects   
* 1Q60 (Rotational Stability)   

## Diagram
    
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q6008/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```
     
  
## Equipment   
 *  Rugby ball
    
## Presentation   
The rugby ball lies on the floor. By hand it is given a fast spin around its short axis (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q6008/figure_1.png>`).

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q6008/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

When the ball has made some turns it lifts itself, finally standing on its nose (tail) and rotating around its long axis. 
  
## Explanation   
- When the ball turns around its short axis ( $\omega_{s}$ ) it will tilt its long axis a little due to unbalanced mass distribution. Then spinning around its long axis  $\left(\omega_{/}\right)$ will start (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q6008/figure_2.png>`) and at the same time, the long axis starts a precession ( $I_{2} \omega_{1}$ moves into the direction of $T_{p}$ ).    

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1q6008/figure_2.png  
---  
. 
```
- The point of contact slips on the floor (see Diagram). The friction force $\left(F_{f}\right)$ on the ball is pointing in the same direction as its direction of precession. The torque ( $T_{f}$ ) of this friction force is pointing upward (see Diagram), almost perpendicular to $I_{2} \omega_{\nu}$. So the friction force gives a torque that erects the ball ( $I_{2} \omega /$ moves into the direction of $T_{f}$ ).
- See also the demonstrations [Precession 3a](../../1Q50%20Gyros/1Q5008%20Precession/1Q5008.md) and [Precession 3b](../../1Q50%20Gyros/1Q5009%20Precession/1Q5009.md) in this database where it is shown how a precessing object reacts to an applied torque.
   
  
## Remarks
- Friction between ball and floor must be high enough to make this demonstration successful.
- This demonstration can also be done with a hardboiled egg. Doing it on my kitchen table, the angular speed of the egg must be quite high to reach the lifting effect. 
  
## Sources
 *  Borghouts, A.N., Inleiding in de Mechanica, pag. 230-231 
 *  Friedrich, Artur, Handbuch der experimentellen Schulphysik, part 2, Mechanik der festen Körper, pag. 233-235 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 230-231
  