# 03 Diffraction (2b), Single Slit 
  
## Aim   
 To show diffraction on a variable single slit.    
  
## Subjects   
* 6C20 (Diffraction Around Objects)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6c2003_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
- Steel table.
- Magnetic clamps, used to fix the components to the steel table.
- Laser, $50 \mathrm{~mW}$.
- Two surface mirrors $(1 / 10 \lambda$ ).
- Lens, $\mathrm{f}=+10 \mathrm{~mm}$.
- Lens, $\mathrm{f}=+50 \mathrm{~mm}$.
- Adjustable diaphragm.
- Slide holder.
- Lens, $\mathrm{f}=132 \mathrm{~mm}$.
- Opticail rail, $\mathrm{I}=1 \mathrm{~m}$, as guiding ruler.
- Variable slit with vernier adjustment.
- Overheadsheet with {numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_1.png>`.
    
  
## Presentation   
### Preparation

The demonstration is set up as shown in Diagram:

-The two mirrors are positioned in such a way that the laserbeam passes parallel to the table. -The two lenses ( $+10 \mathrm{~mm}$ and $+50 \mathrm{~mm}$ ) are positioned at an intermediate distance of $60 \mathrm{~mm}$. Having passed these lenses, the laserbeam is broadened. Take care that the broadened beam is still parallel to the table.

-The lens of $132 \mathrm{~mm}$ can easily be shifted in this beam up and down using the carefully positioned guidance rail.

### Demonstration

The set-up as described in Preparation is shortly explained to the students. The most important in this explanation is that the slit will be placed in a broadened beam and that the adjustable slit will be illuminated by plane waves.

The laser is switched on. A spot of $2 \mathrm{~cm}$ projects on the wall (see ["Diffraction(2a)](../6C2002 Diffraction Single Slit/6C2002.md>)). The $+132 \mathrm{~mm}$-lens is placed at the end of the guiding ruler, to project an enlarged image of the interference-pattern as it will be "seen" around $85 \mathrm{~cm}$ (1m-132mm) behind the slit. The broadened and enlarged beam projects as a spot on the wall (diameter of the spot is around $40 \mathrm{~cm}$ ). The slit is closed and positioned in the beam. (By means of an overheadsheet it is shown to the students what the geometrical projection will show to us (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_1.png>`): When the wall is at a distance as indicated in this figure, then the slit width $a$ is projected 20 times larger on the wall. So when the slit width is $0,1 \mathrm{~mm}$, then we will see a width of $2 \mathrm{~mm}$.)     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6c2003_figure_1.png  

. 
```
-slit at $0.2 \mathrm{~mm}$, band of light $=15 \mathrm{~cm}$, first subsidiary maxima appear;

-slit at $0.3 \mathrm{~mm}$, central band of light $=8 \mathrm{~cm}$, four subsidiary maxima on both sides;

-further opening of slit compresses the observed diffraction pattern;

-slit at $0.7 \mathrm{~mm}$, central band of light $=1 \mathrm{~cm}$, around 10 subsidiary maxima on both sides (see Diagram C; reality is much better than this photograph).

At this $0.7 \mathrm{~mm}$ slit width the first subsidiary maxima are almost as intens as the central maximum. Usually here we stop the demonstration (see Remarks).   
  
## Explanation   
When the slit is $0.1 \mathrm{~mm}$ and the geometrical projection would be only $2 \mathrm{~mm}$ wide, clearly light is bending, broadening the band to $20 \mathrm{~cm}$.

Many textbooks give a detailed explanation (see Sources). We consider {numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_2.png>`.
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 6c2003_figure_2.png  

. 
```
At $\mathrm{P}, \mathrm{N}$ secondary wavelets superimpose, having a path difference of $\frac{a}{N} \sin \theta$. Applying phase addition (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_2.png>`B), $\mathrm{A}_{p}$ is the resultant wave amplitude at $\mathrm{P}$. At $\mathrm{O}$, the total amplitude of the secondary wavelets will be the arclength in that phasor diagram, since all vectors then have the same phase. At Q ( $\theta$ is larger) the phase difference between the "individual" secondary wavelets is larger and the phase diagram ({numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_2.png>`C) shows that the total amplitude can eventually be zero.

Analysis gives for the intensities $\left(I_{\theta}\right)$ (see textbooks): $\frac{I_{\theta}}{I_{0}}=\left[\frac{\sin \left(\frac{\pi a \sin \theta}{\lambda}\right)}{\frac{\pi a \sin \theta}{\lambda}}\right]^{2}=\left[\frac{\sin \alpha}{\alpha}\right]$. Minima occur at $\sin \alpha=0$, so when $\alpha=\mathrm{n} \pi$, and maxima at $\alpha=\left(\frac{2 n+1}{2}\right) \pi$. The intensities of these maxima are then given by $\frac{I_{\theta}}{I_{0}}=\frac{\sin ^{2} \alpha}{\alpha}=\frac{4}{(2 n+1)^{2} \pi^{2}}$.

$\mathrm{n}=1$ gives $\mathrm{I}_{1}=0.045 \mathrm{I}_{0}$;

$\mathrm{n}=2, \mathrm{I}_{2}=0.016 \mathrm{I}_{0}$, etc.

So, the subsidiary maxima are comparatively weak, but yet clearly visible as the demonstration showed.
  
## Remarks   
- The $+132 \mathrm{~mm}$ lens is positioned at a distance of about $1 \mathrm{~m}$ away from the slit. This means that on the wall an image is projected of a point around $85 \mathrm{~cm}$ (1m-132mm) away from that slit. In that way it is assured that the diffraction pattern is far field Fraunhofer pattern. Increasing the slit opening beyond $0.7 \mathrm{~mm}$ will transfer the projected pattern into a Fresnel diffraction pattern, spoiling (complicating) our demonstration. The transition form Fraunhofer to Fresnel diffraction occurs in this set-up at around (see {numref}`Figure {number} <6c2003_figure_1.png>`): $s=a^{2} / 2 \lambda, s=85 \mathrm{~cm}$, so $a=1 \mathrm{~mm}$. In this single slit introductory demonstration we should not go beyond that width. (See the demonstration ["Fraunhofer-Fresneldiffraction"](<../6C2004 Fraunhofer and Fresnel Diffraction/6C2004.md>).) 
  
## Sources   
- Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 442-447
- Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 325-327
- Young, H.D. and Freeman, R.A., University Physics, pag. 1167-1169
- Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 890-893