# 01 Tablecloth Pull 
    
  
## Aim   
To show an example of Newton's first law    
  
## Subjects   
* 1F20 (Inertia of Rest)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1f2001/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```
  
## Equipment   
 *  Sheet of paper. 
 *  Different objects placed on the sheet of paper.
      
  
## Presentation

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BSclXCB8nKc?si=tr-6ImnEZfDLtoIo"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

Set the table as shown in Diagram (light a candle etc.). Our tablecloth is not really a tablecloth. We use a sheet of paper (see Diagram).  Take the protruding free end of the paper in both hands and give a sharp downward jerk. The sheet of paper comes out from under the glasses and they are hardly moved. (Even the water in the glasses is not disturbed!)   
  
## Explanation   
This is one of the many possible demonstrations to show the validity of Newton's first law.

Also Newton's second law can be used to explain this demonstration:

The effect of a given force between the sheet of paper and the glasses depend on the impulse of that force ( $F \Delta t)$. The impulse is small when the sheet of paper moves away quickly ( $\Delta t$ is small). The resulting horizontal displacement will then be very small. Analysis shows that the horizontal displacement $d$ of a mass on the sheet equals:

$d=\frac{1}{2} k_{1} g \Delta t^{2}\left(1+\frac{k_{1}}{k_{2}}\right)$, where $k_{1}$ is the coefficient of friction between sheet and glass and $k_{2}$ is the coefficient of friction between glass and table and $\Delta t$ the time to pull the sheet from beneath the glasses. So $d$ is very sensitive to $\Delta t$ ! 
  
## Remarks
 *  After lecture students like to try the demonstration by themselves. 
 *  This demonstration needs trying it before you show it!
   
  
## Sources
 *  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 21 
 *  Sutton, Richard Manliffe, Demonstration experiments in Physics, pag. 46-49 
 *  Jones, Evan, The Physics Teacher, Vol. 15, pag. 389 
 *  Perez, Joseph, The Physics Teacher, Vol. 15, pag. 242
  
