# 03 Coriolis (1b) 

## Aim   
To show the effect on an object moving with constant velocity in a rotating reference frame.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1E20 (Rotating Reference Frames) 
* 1E30 (Coriolis Effect)   

## Diagram
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e2003/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```
  
## Equipment   
- Rotating platform.
- Board, with square grid $\left(10 \times 10 \mathrm{~cm}^{2}\right)$.
- Tripod with camera fixed to rotating platform.
- Large tripod to hold cables to the camera (see Diagram).
- Clamping material.
  
## Safety   
 
 *  Take care not to make too many rotations into one direction, because then the cables to the camera twist too much.
    
  
## Presentation   

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
    <div style="position: relative; width: 70%; height: 0; padding-bottom: 56.25%;">
        <iframe
            src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8Qdkv0y7fFw?si=vVCM4Kh5RulQ7HD4"
            style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;"
            frameborder="0"
            allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
            allowfullscreen
        ></iframe>
    </div>
</div>

This demonstration is equal to [Coriolis](../1E2002%20Coriolis/1E2002.md). The difference is that now the camera presents directly to the audience what is observed on the rotating platform.

Again show that the steel ball follows a straight line in the lecture hall's frame of reference, while the camera shows a curved path.

Rotate the platform in both directions. 
  
## Explanation   
$\vec{F}_{\text {cor }}=2 m\left(\bar{v}^{'} \times \bar{\omega}\right) . \vec{v}^{'}$ and $\bar{\omega}$ are continuously perpendicular to each other. {numref}`Figure {number} <1e2003/figure_1.png>` shows the direction of the resulting $F_{\text {cor }}$. So $F_{\text {cor }}$ points as seen from $\vec{v}^{'}$ continuously to the left, giving $m$ a counter clockwise path.

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e2003/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

When the platform rotates into the other direction, in Figure $1 \bar{\omega}$ will point upward and the resulting $\vec{F}_{\text {cor }}$ will be the opposite direction.  
  
## Sources
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 182 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 137-145 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 197-202, 205-210
  
