# 02 Galilean Cart 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show and discuss an example of Galilean transformations    
  
## Subjects   
* 1E10 (Moving Reference Frames)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1002/figure_0.png  
---  
. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Two carts, easy rolling and able to carry a human being; construction as shown in the diagram. 
 *  Large funnel (outlet reduced to $4 \mathrm{~mm}$), suspended by three cords. 
 *  Clamping material to support the funnel-pendulum. 
 *  $1 \mathrm{~kg}$ of salt. 
 *  Broom.
     
  
## Presentation   
 
 *  One person sits on the cart, fills the funnel with salt while keeping the outlet closed with a finger, and then gives the funnel pendulum a deflection in the $x'$-direction. The demonstrator moves the cart with constant speed along the front of the lecture hall ($y$-direction). As soon as the cart moves at a constant speed, the person on the cart sets the pendulum swinging. A salt track is left on the floor of the lecture hall (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_2.png>`). This track records the motion of the swinging funnel in the $x$-$y$ plane.  
 
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1002/figure_1.png  
---  
. 
```

 *  The same demonstration is performed, but now with the funnel-pendulum swinging into the $y'$-direction. A second salt-track appears on the floor (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_1.png>`). 
 
Again, the salt track shows the recording of the movement of the swinging funnel in the $x$-$y$ plane. 

The results are discussed.
    
  
## Explanation   
 
- The pendulum moves in the $x^{'}$-$y^{'}$-$z^{'}$-frame according to: $x^{'}=A \sin (\omega t+\phi)$; $y^{'}=0 ; z^{'}=0$. The writing on the ground in salt is in the $x-y-z$-frame. The $x^{'}-y^{'}-z^{'}-$ frame moves with a speed $\mathrm{V}$ into the $\mathrm{y}$-direction., so a point measured in the $x^{'}-$ $y^{'}-z^{'}$-frame will have an $y$-coordinate: $y=V t$. (see Figure2).
- When the pendulum swings into the $y^{'}$-direction, the movements in the $x$-y-zframe will be: $y=V t+A \sin (\omega t+\phi) ; x=0$ and $z=0$ (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_2.png>`).   
  
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 70%  
name: 1e1002/figure_2.png  
---  
. 
```

## Remarks
 *  As {numref}`Figure {number} <1e1002/figure_1.png>` makes clear, the difference between much - and little salt is more pronounced when $y=V t$ is steeper; that is at higher speeds of the cart.   
  
## Sources
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 173-174 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 24-25
     
