# 07 Dumb-Bell 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show that change in direction of angular momentum needs a torque.    
  
## Subjects   
* 1Q40 (Conservation of Angular Momentum) 1Q60 (Rotational Stability)   

## Diagram
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q4007_figure_0.png  

. 
```

## Equipment
 *  Dumbbell pivoted on a support at a non-symmetry axis through the center of mass. 
 *  Frame in order to lift off the dumbbell from the support
     
  
## Presentation   
The dumbbell is placed on top of the support. A thread is fixed to the center of mass and thrown over the top of the frame and hold slack, away from the dumbbell. The dumbbell is given a rotation by hand. Make the students observe that the two masses of the rotating dumbbell describe two horizontal circles ({numref}`Figure {number} <1q4007_figure_1.png>`a).  

```{figure} figures/figure_1.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q4007_figure_1.png  

. 
```
Lift the dumbbell from its support. Almost immediately it can be seen that now the rotation of the dumbbell takes place in one slanting plane ({numref}`Figure {number} <1q4007_figure_1.png>`b).

Before lift-off it can be seen that while the dumbbell rotates, the vertical support shaft oscillates/shakes/wobbles strongly and yet it is a thick and strong steel shaft!  
  
## Explanation   
The dumbbell-shaped object rotates about a non-symmetry axis through the center of mass O. {numref}`Figure {number} <1q4007_figure_2.png>`a shows the angular momentum vector of the rotating dumbbell relative to $\mathrm{O}$ at the instant drawn and while the dumbbell rotates the angular momentum vector describes a cone. So the angular momentum changes direction continuously. To do this a torque is needed. The ballbearing support at O gives that torque: A centripetal force $F_{c}$ is needed to move $m$ around in a circle (see {numref}`Figure {number} <1q4007_figure_2.png>`b). This needs a torque $\vec{F}_{c} \times \vec{r}$. (Also $\vec{M}=\frac{d \vec{L}}{d t}$ gives this result.)

```{figure} figures/figure_2.png
:width: 70%  
:label: 1q4007_figure_2.png  

. 
```
This torque also makes the support shaft wobble. The dumbbell needs to rotate in such a way as the direction of $\vec{L}$ dictates at the moment of lift-off. 
  
## Remarks
- The wobbling of the support shaft can also be described in terms of dynamical unbalance: The angular momentum ( $\vec{L}$ ) and the angular velocity $(\vec{\omega})$ are not parallel.
   
  
## Sources
 *  Alonso, M/Finn, E. J., Fundamentele Natuurkunde, part 1, Mechanica, pag. 215-217 
 *  Borghouts, A.N., Inleiding in de Mechanica, pag. 221-223 
 *  PSSC, College Physics, pag. 352-355 and 366-367 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 212-213 
 *  Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 287
  